[Music]
you're listening to thank on Kera 90.1
I'm Chris Boyd does understanding the
universe give us the power to control
the universe humans have taught to
explain the workings of the natural
world for Millennia and have used the
methods of modern science with ever
greater Effectiveness since the
enlightenment we've learned to do things
that our ancestors could scarcely have
imagined from global telecommunications
to life-saving Medical Treatments to
tracing the history of the universe to
within seconds of the big bang and my
guest today will argue that there while
there was a beginning to humankind's
Scientific achievement there is no
reason to believe our achievements will
someday reach an end point given what we
know about ourselves he is hopeful that
our acquisition and application of
scientific knowledge could last as long
as the universe itself
David Deutsch is a fellow of the Royal
Society and professor of physics at
Oxford University his new book is called
the beginning of infinity explanations
that transform the world David welcome
to thank
you hi Chris thanks for inviting me you
write that all progress comes from the
human quest for good explanations how
has our definition of a good explanation
evolved over the centuries
uh one of the
um most noticeable changes that happened
in the history of our species was the
Scientific Revolution
which made the difference between
making progress that I was either absent
or so slow that no human ever noticed it
in their lifetime and what has happened
since then which is that we've got used
to change happening all the time and
being just part of our lives
and because that was so noticeable that
that change was so noticeable people
wondered what caused it and the
initially
they've got all sorts of wrong theories
about what it was that made science
successful and and some some truth as
well for example
um it was realized almost immediately
that rejecting Authority was a necessary
condition for making progress Authority
in regard to knowledge though this
spread to political Authority as well
but then uh in in the positive sense
what actually caused science people got
really confused and thought that we kind
of
absorb knowledge of nature by being open
to
um experience and that experience
somehow implanted true ideas about the
world in our minds now this is
completely untrue and what I do in the
book one of the things I do in the book
is Trace how wrong that is and also how
the right the real explanation which is
that we seek hard to vary explanations
applies not only in science but in all
sorts of other fields including art and
morality and political philosophy and so
on
interesting David to reflect on the idea
that before the enlightenment many
people learn it people assume that
everything worth knowing had already
been revealed now today that lack of
curiosity strikes this is almost
dangerous
yes and it's basically very implausible
today because we're all hoping and
expecting that improvements will be made
and and the whole of politics is about
who has the best idea for improvements
and and and so on but if you try to
imagine it's difficult to imagine try to
imagine what it was like during most of
human history when nobody ever
experienced an improvement in anything
then it was in regard to knowledge it
was sort of common sense that there was
this thing called knowledge some we knew
that that some would rise every day and
so on but there was nothing new to
discover because all that was going to
happen tomorrow was that the Sun would
rise again just like it did today
the relationship between curiosity and
intelligence
ah um so curiosity
um I think is a is a way of
referring to the desire for good
explanations it's it's a way of of
thinking that there's there's something
here that we don't know or some problem
some puzzle and we would like to have
the explanation that is a statement
about reality which explains why the
thing we are curious about is as it is
um intelligence well I shy away from
that word because
um it is it's a laden with this wrong
idea of where knowledge comes from it's
it's a sort of
um uh
um it the idea of intelligence is that
we know that there is some ability that
allows us to get good knowledge if only
we have that ability but in fact
knowledge comes from criticism it comes
from conjecture about what might be
better than the ideas we have and
conjecture is fallible
so I shy a curiosity uh is great
intelligence I think is a misleading
term and I'd rather refer to things like
criticism and creativity
find it fascinating that many of the
scientists we speak to on this program
have a similar philosophy about
intelligence and they're the last people
to say
um being a physicist is is tandem out to
being a genius necessarily and and there
are a lot of other people in other
fields who don't have any problem at all
feeling as if they are very intelligent
uh well I I do think that it's a
disservice to think that as a disservice
to humankind if you like to promote the
view that
success in anything
uh in in anything intellectual that is
is due to something innate it's not due
to innate and innate ability because
there is no such ability possible it is
only due to a critical attitude an open
attitude a desire for truth that sort of
thing and abilities are knowledge
themselves they are things that we learn
in the course of trying to discover the
truth and so forth
can we trust ourselves to use our newly
gained abilities for good rather than
evil
um
says part of the question of whether
this spectacular growth of knowledge
that has happened in science
can happen in other fields as well in
the one you're asking about is morality
and I think that the answer must be yes
there there is such a thing as an
objective difference between right and
wrong and although uh you know it's easy
to be cynical and and look around at all
the evils there are in the world and and
also at all the disagreements about
right and wrong that there are in the
world I think if you look more deeply
and over a longer time scale you can
easily see that there is progress and
that it's not just a matter of cultural
Prejudice or just a matter of definition
for example uh there was a time
um only a few hundred years ago when
every reasonable person would have
thought that slavery is a natural state
of some people and that there's nothing
inherently wrong with it whereas now you
hardly find any thinking person who
doesn't agree that it is a great evil
and that steps could and should be made
to abolish it
covered some of the ways that we have
just physically changed the world that
we live in for example a lot of modern
cities today are shaped as much by human
intervention as by geologic forces we
talk about that a little bit
yes so we a city is the obvious example
of of what I think is a general truth
remember we're only at the beginning of
infinity and always will be and and on
Earth we're only at the beginning of
shaping it but a city is an example of
the fact that once knowledge is involved
in physical processes it is the
determining factor of the landscape that
is whereas other species that the ones
that are incapable of generating
knowledge are shaped by and adapted to
their landscape
humans create their own landscape and
shape it and adapt it
so for humans there is no such thing as
a resource until some human has
developed the knowledge for making it a
resource and I think that
um if we choose to do the right thing
and continue to produce knowledge and to
to seek uh better things and progress
that this will extend
um to to every anything and everything
we'll move off the planet and and
improve things as we go and uh well no
doubt many people will be thinking as I
say this but cities and other things
that we've done haven't always improved
things you know there's pollution and
and and so on and but I think this
is a myth of a Rosy past it's no good
having thinking of a Rosy past in which
the rivers were clean and the air was
pure if people at that time actually
were plagued by cholera hmm
I want to talk about
um something like global warming you
were confident that we will be able to
survive it given that in the past we
have used our Technologies and our
intellect to survive inhospitable
climates which occurred naturally all
over the planet
yes uh so um global warming is
um one of the first
um challenges uh that
um face us as a global challenges that
face us as a result of
um
uh technology really or or improving
things so we've improved a whole lot of
things and as a result a slow
um worsening has happened in part of our
environment now this has happened on a
smaller scale thousands of times
um with I mean I'm old enough to
remember when when many of the cities in
in England were had a smog and if the
London Fog was deemed to be part of the
London scene not one wasn't even thought
of as a thing that humans could undo
and yet as technology improved wealth
increased and standards increased so the
London Fog became a thing of the past
and just as the London Fog can become a
thing of the past so can the problems of
global warming
so we should strive not for
sustainability of our current existence
but of Innovations to match our needs as
they change yes the idea of
sustainability I think is a terrible
mistake it is a um hyper optimistic view
ironically of what humans are and what
humans can do it's the idea is that we
can find a way of life which will not be
dangerous and will not be threatening
and will not require any further
creativity or progress in order to solve
it now I take the opposite view to that
I think that problems are inevitable and
that any kind of stasis is bound to end
in catastrophe so the only thing that's
sustainable is actual progress and what
we need to do in regard to global
warming but even more in regard to the
things that are coming up that we don't
yet know about which might be far more
dangerous for all we know is to build up
knowledge scientific knowledge and also
technological knowledge and also wealth
to be able to deal with unforeseen
problems when we discover them and alas
also
to recover from disasters that we fail
to foresee
and I guess as challenging as
challenging as it is to create new
Solutions and Innovations
technologically that's still easier than
changing the the basic nature of human
beings and what they want and how they
act well it's more than that if we tried
if we somehow could succeed in changing
the nature of human beings so that they
were not capable of um creating new
knowledge then the same thing would
happen to our species as sap into
99.9 of all species that have ever
existed namely we would go extinct in
fact we would go extinct much faster
because our ecological niche depends on
creating new knowledge all
call them went extinct
and they went extinct not because
they created too much knowledge and and
fell foul of the unintended consequences
of their knowledge but they went extinct
precisely because they lived the
sustainable lifestyle that to which
Evolution had adapted them
and evolution played the same nasty
trick on them as it usually plays on
species it wiped them out for doing so
David Deutsch is my guest he's a fellow
of the Royal Society and professor of
physics at Oxford University his new
book is called the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world we
welcome your participation now you can
call
1-800-933-5372 or you can send email to
think kera.org
[Music]
funding for think comes from smu's
continuing and professional education
you can enrich your career with new
certificate programs in web design
graphic design and paralegal studies
learn more at smu.edu Cape
you're listening to thank God Kera 90.1
I'm Chris Boyd my guest this hour is
Oxford University Physics Professor
David Deutsch his new book is called the
beginning of infinity explanations that
transform the world join our
conversation by sending email to think
kera.org or by calling 1-800-933-5372
David is it reasonable to imagine we
could someday make ourselves immortal
oh yes it
is that
um the the things that make humans die
of of I'm talking about natural causes
as opposed to accidents and wars and so
on are all just technological matters
and we have already solved them we've
we've increased a human lifespan from
its natural level of 20 something up to
80 something or whatever it is now and
we know that death is caused by a
certain organic processes in the body
which in principle can be engineered
away
so um you know I talk in the book about
things like traveling to Intergalactic
space which will no doubt not happen for
thousands of years yet but
um it would be very surprising if death
in that sense were not conquered in the
next few centuries
if you think about it I mean ideas
already have the potential to Outlast
the brains and bodies that conceive them
do we need human bodies to be fully
human or would preservation of the
contents of our brains be close enough
yes the the there are several different
strands of technology that might
eventually lead to
um uh the effective end of individual
people's deaths such as uploading Minds
into computers and so on I don't know
which of those will come first they're
all of similar level of
um technological difficulties so the
chances are that pretty soon after one
of them is invented they will all be
invented and
we will think it just as ridiculous not
to back up our minds onto some backup
Medium as we do today not to back up our
life's work from a computer
interesting series of challenges we
would have then deciding who deserves to
be backed up because surely there would
be a financial cost to this
well the the there will no doubt be a
transitional period during which the
technology will be too expensive to
apply to everybody that is already the
case after all uh there are Medical
Treatments now that can save some
people's lives but cannot save the lives
of everybody with that disease uh so we
we have institutions in place that can
take care of that situation but it will
only be temporary because one of the
things that I uh elaborate in some
detail in my book is that uh the
progress always consists of alternating
phases uh first a creative phase which
solves the fundamental problems and then
what Thomas Edison called the
perspiration phase where we um optimize
things and the thing about the
perspiration phase is that it can be
always can be automated and once
something is automated its cost goes
down to zero because the only thing that
ultimately costs anything is human
attention and creativity so soon after
technology is available it will become
cheaper and eventually will become just
as much taken for granted as a supply of
fresh drinking water
the evolution of human knowledge and
culture rather than genes in this case
we talk about memes and you explain that
some survive because they're good and
rational others survive and reproduce
specifically because they crowd out
people's appetite for seeking new ideas
and new explanations uh yes the the
theory of memes which was uh first
thought of by Richard Dawkins and then
elaborated by Susan Blackmore and many
others I think it's fundamentally true
but what I say in the book is that all
the existing treatments of memes
um miss the most important thing about
them which is this distinction that you
just mentioned between what I call
rational and anti-rational memes the
rational memes you characterized just
about correctly that they are the memes
that are transmitted from person to
person because the recipient
finds that having that in that knowledge
or that behavior benefits them but then
the anti-rational memes it's not that
they remove interest it's that they
disable people from
um uh criticizing them so that there are
ideas that that disable criticism of
themselves
and and of course Richard dawkins's
favorite example of this uh uh are
certain religions though I don't think
it's at all true of all religions but
still
um the his archetypal example of that he
cites is
um uh if you once you start believing
that there's a God who will punish you
if you stop believing in him then
thoughts about that get suppressed in
your mind and therefore that Meme gets
hard to abandon but uh I think that's
this kind of meme which has an overt
content of saying
um Don't stop believing in me is
actually a rare kind and the more
Insidious kinds are the ones that we
don't really know why we're doing them
um such as well you mentioned
immortality a while ago I think that
there is um an irrational meme
that
um makes people suspicious of the idea
of immortality they don't mind
lengthening lifespan but once you talk
about a lengthening lifespan without any
limit they start imagining imagining
purely imaginary objections to this and
I don't think that is rational
yeah it is funny that we have you know
many many uh religious Traditions that
look forward to and afterlife but it's
something completely separate and apart
from what we have here but if you look
even at literature
um the stories of human beings who
somehow become immortal they're always
miserable and desperate to end this
thing yes
um this this is an example of the
irrationality I was speaking of and it
is very ironic about religions that
religions too take this view it's
somehow by think that it having real
immortality would cheat people of the
imaginary immortality that religions
offer or something like that it's by the
way also interesting that the first
mathematical series of infinity and I
talk about those two in the book were
bitterly opposed by the church and and
religious people on the grounds that it
was inherently wrong for humans to try
to usurp the functionality of God in
trying to understand the infinite
1-800-933-5372 is our telephone number
we're speaking this hour with David
Deutsch about his new book the beginning
of infinity explanations that transform
the world let's speak with Ken on the
phone in Fort Worth hi Ken
hello thank you for taking my call ma'am
I love the show and
um I appreciate what the gentleman has
been saying but my question is if we
allow companies to
um use all the resources the finite
resources on the Earth
and not go a sustainable way how can we
rely on technology to to sustain us
yes
um the the idea that the resources of
the Earth are
um well the resources available to
humans are finite
um is a mistake first of all it's only
knowledge that converts something into a
resource in the first place nobody knew
that pitch blend uranium ore was a
resource until on rebeccarell discovered
radioactivity and so on
um so and soon we will be mining The
Asteroids for minerals that are
extremely rare on Earth
the universe is is uh to all intents and
purposes unlimited and it is our home
and
um the to regard
um
just the resources that you know about
today as being the resources will always
lead you into the era of thinking that
they are finite and then once we have
used them up what will we do then
unfortunately we have no choice because
even if we remained at a present level
of technology and some and sustained it
forever all that would do is postpone
our Extinction
if we want to avoid our Extinction we
have there is nothing sustainable except
the growth of knowledge
you're not arguing of course that we
should want only go out and waste
physical resources that's not the point
that you're making no that's not the the
question is whether there is an inherent
limit on our progress or not
the notion made Popular by Stephen
Hawking and others that that Free Will
is in fact a sort of Illusion can you
talk about that
yes uh this is
um
this is the idea that
um because
we are made of atoms and atoms are
subject to laws of motion that don't
allow any wiggle room
therefore
thing we do also doesn't allow any
wiggle room and therefore our Free Will
must be an illusion now I think that's
um that's that's called reductionism and
it is simply a mistake uh it's it's sort
of
um assuming that the laws of physics
are a kind of a person uh that they're a
kind of um a supernatural being that
makes us do things but it's not true the
laws of physics are simply a description
of what we do
and descriptions so it's not the laws of
physics that make atoms move around it
laws of physics are simply a description
of what they do and the thing about that
we see about the world is that there are
levels of description there are
descriptions at the atomic level and
descriptions at the molecular level and
the biological level and then there are
descriptions which and explanations at
the level of human thought and there's
no reason that to expect that just
because there's a low level description
there isn't also a high level
explanation in description and in the
book I I give some arguments both due to
me and due to people like Douglas
hofstetter that the
um high level description is sometimes
the only reasonable explanation of what
is happening so for example if you are
if you play a game of chess against a
computer
then it's not the Silicon that has
beaten you it's the program
program in the computer and that program
is an abstraction
it's the the program doesn't consist of
atoms the program is an abstraction over
the atoms just like uh human thought is
an abstraction over our atoms and the it
is the the programs is beat new and when
I make a decision it's I Who Have Made
It not my atoms and not the laws of
physics so we get really unnecessarily
and detrimentally hung up on this sense
that we can get to the absolute
Foundation of anything
that's true as well uh the the the idea
that there's an absolute Foundation is a
formula for uh stagnation in science and
for tyranny in politics and so on
um there there will never be an absolute
foundation for knowledge because there
will always be the question once we have
got a particular fundamental theory of
why it is that way and not some other
way
1-800-933-5372 is our telephone number
we have an email here from Paul in
Farmers Branch who says it seems to me
we will have many opportunities to go
extinct regardless of how creative we
are nuclear Annihilation asteroid
collisions solar mass ejection
uncontrollable disease we may simply not
have enough time to prepare to survive
well I agree with everything in that
except for the regardless
um the thing is that in all those cases
there is a possible there is a way that
we could make the wrong decisions and be
wiped out as a result including refusing
to make decisions or shutting our eyes
to problems and so on but there is also
a thing we could do to prevent that and
in all those cases I mean I've forgotten
what they all were now but I was noting
as you read them out that
um in every case
sufficient knowledge would have would
solve that problem
so if we were at a place where we could
handle it then we could handle it but uh
the the question is whether of course
there is the possibility that that uh it
would it would happen before we have
that knowledge and the lesson of that
fact for example uh uh an asteroid
strike by something going too fast and
too big for us to stop it right now
um
the lesson of that is that not only do
we make do we need to make progress we
need to make rapid progress or we will
be wiped out
will knowledge continue to grow even if
our brains and bodies don't evolve in
quite the same way they did when we were
simply trying to survive
yes we um we have become Universal
explanation machines Universal computers
Universal explanation machines and that
means that
um the the limits of our ability are
fixed only by the laws of physics and
not by our own Constitution for example
again I give this example in the book
um humans without technology couldn't
possibly live in Oxford where I live
because the winters in Oxford would kill
any human that wasn't protected by
technology such as clothes and weapons
to hunt with and so on and uh so and
um even in the Great Rift Valley in
Africa where our species evolved by the
time we had evolved we were already
absolutely dependent on technology to
survive
technology like fire and clothing and so
we're we're not dependent on our
physical Constitution because we can
always adapt Nature by using knowledge
to compensate for any physical defects
that we have or as we like to think of
it any physical defects that our
environment may have
let's go back to the phones now our next
caller is Adam in Dallas hello Adam
yes hi I'm Adam I'm from Dallas and my
question is this
if doctors really are able to offer for
science for those Sciences really offer
able to offer you immortality
will that come with
infinite use like you'll never age or
will that be just a constant state of
kind of like living on a like a life
machine you know those machines that
hook people up to the yeah live even
after the body is going it'll be the
former the the same argument that tells
us that death is merely a technological
problem tells us that youth is also
merely a technological problem
the the task of transforming uh an older
body into a younger body is ultimately
just a task of engineering the cells to
be in a slightly different way
and go ahead and that requires only
knowledge
David Deutsch is my guest he's a fellow
of the Royal Society and professor of
physics at Oxford University his newest
book is called the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world
join the conversation by calling in now
to
1-800-933-5372 you can also send an
email to think kera.org
[Music]
foreign
funding for think comes from smu's
continuing and professional education
you can enrich your career with new
certificate programs in web design
graphic design and paralegal studies
learn more at smu.edu Cape
you're listening to thank on Kera 90.1
I'm Chris Boyd we're speaking this hour
with Oxford University Physics Professor
David Deutsch whose newest book is
called the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world
our telephone number is
1-800-933-5372 the email address is
think
kera.org it would be impossible to argue
that faith in an ultimate solution say a
cure for cancer has driven a great deal
of progress and and spurred the
acquisition of a great deal of knowledge
over time you say though that um
absolute faith in an ultimate solution
can hinder progress after a certain
point will you explain that
yes certainly
um this is this is
um in philosophy the debate about two
different meanings of the phrase that
humans are perfectable so in one meaning
of that it means that there is a perfect
state that we can reach if we only do
the right thing like like charm the
right syllables or whatever
um or or a a Utopia a perfect society
that we can reach if only we kill the
right people and and so on and that
notion of perfectability leads to
stagnation and tyranny
other notion of perfectability which is
that Improvement is always possible
which in some ways is equally optimistic
but in in in in other ways is
um much more rational it is also true
and that's the the sense of
perfectability that I argue for that
problems are always soluble problems are
also inevitable and that's why we really
have no choice but to embark on an
open-ended pursuit of knowledge and good
explanations until there's always room
for improvement yes you know it's
interesting just this morning on the
radio there was a story about
um the uh long philosophy of thinking
that people are either auditory or
visual Learners has been disproven at
least in in one large study and and it's
funny because it's one of those things
that for a long time we based our
education systems around this idea that
we understood how people learn one way
or another when we could cater to that
had we not continued to question that we
wouldn't have gotten to the place where
maybe we can teach even better
yes I I hadn't heard of that study but
it sounds extremely plausible to me and
I would have expected that to be so uh I
would even go further and I would say
that even if it had been true that some
people are auditory and some people are
visual this is itself merely a problem
could overcome
if they were interested in doing so the
reason I think that would would have
been true
um is that we are general purpose
knowledge creating machines
let's go back to the phones now at
1-800-933-5372 we have Sal on the line
in Richardson hello South
uh this is Sal David this is a
surprise I just finished reading your
your work last night and lo and Beholder
on the radio uh my question in regards
to uh
I mean your work kind of appeals to a
lot of telematic people like me if it
kind of uh has a symphony uh
an effect on myself and people like me I
guess but my question is maybe you're
the of you average uh interpretation of
quantum mechanics for instance uh seems
to be not amenable to the the kind of
scientific inquiry dynamics that you
talk about in your book which is
convection criticize and Festival would
you care to come down that whether
yeah
I thought dogmatics that is almost on uh
bearing a religious uh belief yes it's a
it's a line of criticism that that uh is
often heard that the the idea that
um there are the quantum mechanics
forces upon us the theory of parallel
universes is a sort of religious Theory
because all the quantum mechanics can
actually tell us is the outcomes of
experiments it can't actually prove that
the mechanism by which these outcomes
are brought about is as the theory says
so maybe it isn't and maybe there aren't
these parallel universes the trouble is
that that is exactly
exactly uh line which would let you say
that
um the observations of the planet don't
necessarily tell us that the plant that
the sun is at the center of the solar
system it could still be the Earth and
that all that happens is that the light
reaching the Earth is as if there were
planets out there orbiting the Sun this
is exactly the argument that the results
of quantum mechanics are just as if
um uh there were parallel universes
producing them or to give a rather
notorious topical example it's like the
people who say that fossils were put
there exactly as if there had been
dinosaurs that gave rise to them but
nobody has ever seen a dinosaur no nor
will anybody ever see the dinosaurs that
produce the fossils and therefore it's a
matter of religion to believe in them
but that is to misconstrue what science
is about science is not about just
predicting the outcomes of experiments
it is about understanding the world
what's the value of the mistakes we have
made and continue to make over time in
our pursuit of science
the the pursuit of science is as as my
old boss John Wheeler used to say uh in
in who was in Austin Texas at the time
when I worked with him
um our whole problem is to make the
mistakes as fast as possible and in the
book I say that it might it might help
people to understand better the nature
of the scientific process if we called
scientific theories
misconceptions right from the outset
rather than only after we have
discovered what's wrong with them if we
are going to expect continual
Improvement we must expect that all our
existing theories can at least contain
although they contain a lot of Truth
they also contain misconceptions and
therefore in the final analysis are
misconceptions so we could we could talk
about Einstein's misconception of
gravity being a better misconception
than Newton's misconception of gravity
error is the natural and ubiquitous
state of human Minds the only difference
is whether we improve upon our errors or
don't or refuse to and if we want to
improve upon them we have to do these
specific things involving criticism
seeking better explanations uh seeking
the truth openness tolerance and so on
your way of thinking really appeals to
me because there are people who would
find our consistent and predictable
fallibility as time goes by really
depressing but it's a source of delight
for you
it is it is it is the it is the means of
progress
and to regard error as uh you talked
about uh education just now one of the
one of the things that another thing
that has held back education is the idea
that education is about
finding ways of not making errors but in
fact progress only ever comes through
making errors and errors are to be
encouraged and as I said our whole
problem is to make them as fast as
possible
let's go next on the phone to Colleen in
Dallas hello Colleen hi um thanks for
having me sure um what I was wondering
was I I've learned arguments I think
Descartes uh that if you can imagine of
infinity or if you can imagine an
infinite being that that is a proof of
the existence of God but from what I
understand like the idea of infinity is
more of a scientific idea and that that
idea itself merely refers to like a
physical reality to apply that to
something that's rather alternate or
completely non-physical is kind of a
fallacy so I was just wondering what
your take on that was
um I almost agree uh it was certainly
the that proof that a purported proof
called the ontological proof I think of
the existence of God is a fallacy and we
can't blame the um early philosophers
for making that statement because
Infinity wasn't properly understood
until about the 19th century but it's
not Infinity is not only a thing about
physics like for example that there's an
infinite number of points uh in a in a
one-inch distance
which we now know how to make sense of
statements like that but it's also
um uh meaningful in mathematics and we
it has been found that we can reason
validly about infinity and deeply
understand Infinity in mathematics too
is it possible that that some other
civilization somewhere in the universe
could arrive and explain all this to us
or will it only have meaning if we as
human beings find the answers we seek on
our own
um here's another education Theory Point
um whenever you understand something it
is you who have created that idea in
your mind it may feel as though somebody
has poured it into you like like a wine
into a glass but that is an illusion all
knowledge arises by conjecture and
criticism and what we do when we listen
to somebody speaking we don't download
their Theory into our brain if we did we
wouldn't understand it it would be like
learning it in a foreign language what
we do is conjecture what it means and
then use what that person is saying as a
means of criticizing and improving art
conjecture and with luck we then find a
way of understanding what that person is
saying and with even more luck we find a
way of improving on it
you have a fascinating chapter in the
book which might surprise people devoted
to the question of why flowers are
beautiful and and you demonstrate that
at least some things of beauty are in
fact objectively beautiful or appear to
be why do flowers fit that description
the
um conventional view of beauty is that
it is
purely subjective or or else purely
cultural that that it has no objective
basis so so when we say it's a matter of
taste that's enough just another way in
everyday language of of saying there
isn't any objective truth in it but uh
the thing about flowers is that they had
flowers had to the evolution of flowers
had to solve a problem of how to make a
signal to of attractiveness that would
be difficult to forge but also easy to
recognize by someone else who knew in
this case insects who knew the code and
um so the the insect flower co-evolution
produced a standard which was an
artistic standard for what flowers
should look like now that my argument
for why it hit on an objective standard
is if that was so and there are plenty
of examples of signaling in nature
but most of them don't look beautiful to
humans so the question is why do flowers
which evolved to look attractive to
Insects also look attractive to humans
and I make the argument in detail in the
book that the only explanation for this
is that to solve this problem of an
interspecies signaling
the the most efficient way of solving
that problem was for both the insects
and the flowers to evolve towards a
Criterion of objective Beauty which then
appealed to humans as well because
humans are capable of understanding
objective things
best way to guard against our tendency
to lose sight of our own fallibility or
our Embrace of mistakes in service of
progress
I think we have to
um look at
whether
things we are saying and the things we
are doing
meet the problems that they are
purported to meet
so if if you say
um you know why am I in this job and if
you have um if you if the best
explanation that you can come up with
for why you are in that job is one that
you would think was silly if someone
else said it about their job then that's
prima facie evidence that
you're in a an irrational pattern of
thinking by the way like I anything else
this is not a conclusive evidence
because it may be that you are in fact
in the right job but don't actually know
the reason but in that case it would do
you good to know the reason
um do you find it challenging to have
these conversations with people like me
or people in in a general audience or do
you find that like discussing these
ideas with regular people who have not
studied them in depth actually helps to
clarify your own thinking oh definitely
the latter and um it's uh if anything uh
the professionals are more likely to be
stuck in their ways than people who if I
can put it this way have real lives and
and whose philosophical problems grow
out of real life problems there's also
the fact that as you will have noticed
um I really like pontificating
which makes you an excellent radio guest
thank you David dorch is a fellow of the
Royal Society and professor of physics
at Oxford University his new book is
called the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world
David it's been quite a pleasure thank
you so much for spending this hour with
us thank you for having me on the
program my name is Chris Boyd thanks for
listening and have a great day
[Music]
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
the think production team includes
engineer nilafer arsala our senior
producer is Jeff Whittington learn more
about today's show find out about
upcoming programs and download our free
daily podcasts at kera.org thick and
we'd like to hear what you think about
think email your comments questions and
suggestions and think at kera.org
[Music]